# *Demeure* / *Fiction and Testimony*
#### Seminar presentation by Geoffrey Bates, 100846572
#### Prof. Stuart J Murray
#### ENGL 5002
#### 06-02-2019

## Purpose

> I REMEMBER a young man - a man still young - prevented from dying by death itself-and perhaps the error of injustice. (Blanchot, *The Instant of My Death*, 3)



# My hypothesis is that these seven trajectories (of *passion*) traverse the text *The Instant of My Death*, which Maurice Blanchot published several months ago, and which I will attempt to read with you a little later. I do not know whether this text belongs, purely and properly and strictly and rigorously speaking, to the space of literature, whether it is a fiction or a testimony, and, above all, to what extent it calls these distinctions into question or causes them all to tremble. (Derrida, *Demeure*, 25-6) 

*Demeure* is an exploration, an investigation into this fundamental instability generated by *The Instant of My Death*. Through the deconstruction of this story and its related ideas, Derrida suggests that the boundaries between fiction and testimony, truth and lie, are not as solid as the words imply. When he says he does not know whether *The Instant of My Death* is fiction or testimony, Derrida is not asking for help in making a decision; he is not opening up the question. Rather, he intends to convince us that this uncertainty, this ambivalence is, perhaps, the right way of looking at the relations between literature and truth. We gain more through accepting the precarity expressed by Blanchot's story than we do by attempting to distinguish its truths and untruths. These distinctions tremble; perhaps they ought to tremble.

Thus Derrida leads us into the *abode* [demeure] of the tangled relationships of fiction and testimony.

### Argument: investigating the relationship between fiction and testimony reveals a "double impossibility: the impossibility of deciding, but the impossibility of *remaining* [demeurer] in the undecidable." (16)

1. We are unable to identify a fundamental distinction between fiction and testimony; we are unable to reduce fiction to testimony or testimony to fiction.
2. Yet we *must* be able to identify a fundamental distinction between fiction and testimony, or at least we think we do.
3. We are therefore caught between two impossibilities: either we assert that there is a distinction and try to find it (and be wrong), or we decide not to decide, deferring the question in order to exist in a state of *abidance* [demeurance]. We *abide by* this fundamental inability to choose, this question in suspension.

In other words, we are faced with an impossible choice:
- The first option is to make a decision: either fiction and testimony are fundamentally different from one another, and we can clearly say that a given text is one or the other, or they are fundamentally the same thing, and we can make no solid claims as to their distinction.
- The second option is to avoid choosing between the above two options, to commit to not having an answer.

We choose neither of the above options, and thus commit to not having an answer *again*. Given the consequences of either finding or not finding the borderline between fiction and testimony, truth and untruth, is it better to be wrong or to not know at all? We don't know! Welcome to the abode.

This question extends beyond *fiction* and *testimony*. *Dichtung und Wahrheit*, Derrida notes, are not fiction and testimony. The abiding question, the question we abide by, concerns nothing less than lies and truth, specifically autobiographical lies and truth. For Derrida, *The Instant of My Death* provides a lens through which the double impossibility becomes incandescent, impossible to ignore, begging for examination.

# If, always in irreverent homage to Goethe, *truth* becomes *testimony* here, it is perhaps because, as in *Dichtung und Wahrheit*, it will often be a question today of lies and truth: more precisely, of the biographical or autobiographical truthfulness of a witness who speaks of himself and claims to be recounting not only his life but his death, his quasi-resurrection, a sort of Passion -- at the limits of literature. (17)

This is the problem: how do we understand death as described in Blanchot's testimony/fiction? Are we to take his description as a true account of his experience? How do we reconcile this encounter with death, this concept of death, with what we know or believe to be true? How can we take Blanchot at his word when he tells us about his death before he has actually died? As a way to help answer this, Derrida playfully slides Goethe's *Dichtung und Wahrheit* (his autobiography, translated as "Poetry and Truth" or "Fiction and Truth") in front of us as a tool for understanding the relationship between fiction and truth in the context of autobiographical writing. 

## As a scientist [Goethe] desired to picture his life as developing stage by stage “according to those laws which we observe in the metamorphosis of the plants.” As a historian he portrayed the general conditions of the times and revealed the relations between them and the individual. As an artist he did not feel tied down to facts for their own sake, but selects those that were of significance and moulded them so that they might become parts of a work of art. In the much-discussed title the word 'Poetry' [*Dichtung*] refers primarily to the artistic form of the work. (Ewald Eisenhardt, "Poetry and Truth". *The Encyclopedia Americana*)

Here we observe Goethe's deployment of truth (scientific, historical) and fiction/poetry (in the creation of art through careful curation of experience).

Substituting *testimony* in place of *truth*, Derrida therefore invites us to consider the role of fiction, of artistic expression, in the act of giving testimony or of expressing the truth of one's life and death. Note the indefinite language: "If", "perhaps". The shift towards specificity as Derrida narrows down into the problem, the religious associations ("resurrection", "Passion"), and this idea of being "at the limits of literature." These are all descriptors and interpretations of the components Derrida uses for his argument, but they are also all themes of the talk.

# When a testifying witness, whether or not he is explicitly under oath, appeals to the faith of the other by engaging himself to tell the truth - no judge will accept that he should shirk his responsibility ironically by declaring or insinuating: what I am telling you here retains the status of a literary fiction. And yet, if the testimonial is by law irreducible to the fictional, there is no testimony that does not structurally imply in itself the possibility of fiction, simulacra, dissimulation, lie, perjury - that is to say, the possibility of literature, of the innocent or perverse literature that innocently plays at perverting all of these distinctions. *If this possibility that it seems to prohibit were effectively excluded, if testimony thereby became proof, information, certainty, or archive, it would lose its function as testimony.* (29, emphasis added)

Here Derrida is saying that the value of testimony resides not in any essential truth of the witness' words; its value is in the "faith of the other," the shared belief in the truth of what they are saying. And this shared belief is only possible against a backdrop of untruth, if the witness has the ability to lie or create fiction in the court. The witness when called to testify does not say "let me tell you a story." They commit to speak the truth of their experience, and their testimony is *made true* against the haunting potential of the lie. If we were to take one's testimony as absolute proof, we would open ourselves to being fooled should the witness choose to lie or, if they are telling the truth, there is no longer an act of trust between the witness and the audience. Whence, then, comes our belief in the truth?

This passage touches on another of *Demeure*'s themes: the infinite potential of literature to permute and simulate reality.

# Thus an impossible limit. Untenable. This limit permanently [a demeure] swears testimony to secrecy; it enjoins testimony to remain [demeurer] secret, even where it makes manifest and public. I can only testify, in the strict sense of the word, from the instant when no one can, in my place, testify to what I do. (30)

The irreducibility of testimony to fiction results in an uncomfortable fact: part of the act of *making truth* depends on the witness holding their testimony in secret; they cannot share their testimony until the *instant* they are called to speak. Truth demands rigour, consistency, and human memory changes over time. How can we trust a truth that changes every time it is spoken? Thus the testimony is confined to the instant - it happens in a very particular place and time, and once spoken, it has served its purpose and become public knowledge.

Derrida identifies "a singlular testimonial alliance of the secret and the instant" (30). The act of testimony is bound to secrecy and expressed, made public, in an instant. 

# The engagement to keep secret is a testimony. The secret assumes not only that there should be some witness, be it, as one says, to share in a secret, but it assumes that the testimony will not simply consist in knowing or making known a secret, in sharing it, but in engaging oneself, in an implicit or explicit manner, to keeping the secret. (32)

As in testimony, the act of keeping a secret implies an act of faith, of trust, on the part of some other to whom you have promised to keep the secret. Again there is the potential for dishonesty; you can reveal the secret to someone else but say to your witness that you have revealed nothing. Keeping a secret, like testimony, is an act of *making true* through faith against the ever-present possibility of the lie.

# Testimony seems to presuppose the instance of the instant that, at that very instant however, it destroys. It destroys it as if it were destroying its own condition of possibility.

If testimony is the act of taking one's private experience, the secret of one's experience, and placing it before the public dressed as truth, the secret is destroyed at the instant the testimonial is given. Private experience becomes public fact. The testimonial, which as we recall depends on the preservation of one's secret experience until the instant of speech, can never again be given as testimony, precisely because the experience no longer fully belongs to the witness. This is not *my* truth, it is *our* truth.





## 2. *Passions of Literature*
Derrida responds to the title of the event at which he is speaking: *Passions of Literature*. "The guest must respond to this name, more than one name" (18)

### Literature
- singular.
- "Literature would thus be the subject and object of these passions, as well as the canvas, or in any case the place, passive and punishable, to which events supervene: an entire history awaits us."
- Is *the* Literature strictly European, or is it *Weltliteratur*?
- Latinity/the Latin filiation.

# *Literature* is a Latin word. This belonging has never been simple: it is a belonging that travels, emigrates, works, and is translated. The Latin filiation is exported and bastardized beyond its boundaries and affinities but always within the vicinity of its borders.

# There is no thought, no experience, no history of literature as such and under this name, no world literature, if such a thing is or remains to come, as Goethe holds somewhat casually, there is no passion of literature that must not first inherit what this latinity assumes and therefore show itself capable of receiving it and, as I would say in French, of suffering it, which is to accept, to receive, to capacitate, to invite, to translate into itself, to assimilate, but also to contain, to keep thus within its boundaries. (21)

### Passions
- plural. There are multiple Passions.
- multiple *meanings* of Passion. Derrida counts "*seven* knotted trajectories" (25) of Passion.
- "'passions' is just as burdened with Christian latinity (as literature)." (25)
#### The seven Passions



# Literary nationalism would be a modern reaction in Europe, like the awakening of nationalities, to Napoleon's superstate project of hegemony. (23)

# Michel Lisse thought it **not unjustified** (this is yet another responsibility I leave to him, while thanking him for it) to associate my name with a very beautiful title, *Passions of Literature*. (20, emphasis added)

## 3. *The Instant of My Death*


## 4. Questions

# Beginning on page 26, Derrida lays out the "seven knotted trajectories" of Passion, which he asserts each animate *The Instant of My Death*. Do you agree that each of these Passions is present in the text? How do these Passions contribute to the "double impossibility" of fiction and testimony *The Instant of My Death* exemplifies?
